Do you remember in the last video
I said that we have created
a script js file and you can write
any valid JavaScript code
here that is going to run.
Actually that was half lie.
Let me tell you, if you are
from a JavaScript background, that
means you have been working
with JavaScript with browsers.
Tell me one thing, if
I say alert, right?
And I say, for example, you know
this is an alert message, what is
going to happen if you run this,
this particular piece of code on
browser, you will get an alert
window, right?
So if you don't believe
me, let me show you.
So if I just open up an inspect
element and I go into the console
and I do this, you can see
that you are getting an alert.
Now let's try to run this code,
okay, let's try to run this code
in the browse in the node js.
And what happened as soon as I
tried to run this code in my node
js environment, I got an error.
The error says alert is
not defined Piyush.
How come this particular code,
this alert is working in the browser
but the same JavaScript code
is not working in the Node js?
So here is a subtle difference
that you have to understand.
See guys, first of all,
a lot of things that you use
in your JavaScript code
is a part of your web API.
For example, this alert, this alert
is not a part of JavaScript, okay?
This is a browser given functionality
to you because whenever
you call this line, browser
gives you this ui, right?
This is the responsibility
of the browser to render
this thing on the ui.
But in Node js, which is basically
a command line, you don't have these
functionalities, you don't have
any window, you don't have any ui,
you don't have any these alerts.
So These browser related APIs,
like you have fetch, you have
alert, you have document,
you have window object
that is not available in node js.
So that means anything, anything that
is related to this window object.
So if I just say window,
okay, wind, window.
So you can see that on
the window, window basically means
this browser, I have a lot
of features on the window.
I can have document, add,
event listener, I have
the document object, I have the set
interval, set timeout.
So, so there are a lot
of features that a browser gives me.
Like it gives me the fetch
for making API calls.
So these all features are
actually the features given to you
by the browser which are not,
which are not available here.
Got it.
So you can write any valid
JavaScript code which is given
to you in the native
JavaScript, it should not be a
feature that is coming from a
browser because we don't have a
browser window here.
This is a, Node js environment.
So that means now you have two
different environments to run js.
One is you have a browser where
you can have your js code,
you can have your browser APIs.
So browser APIs include like
things like, you know,
fetches there and this alert
thing is there, right?
But when you move into the Node js
environment, these things goes away.
You have the core js,
you have extra things.
Okay, I'll tell you, you
have some extra things.
For example, you have file system,
you have crypto module, you
can do crypto typography here.
You can do a lot of more
things here, right?
That is given to you by the Node js.
You can do file handling here,
but you cannot natively do fetch.
You cannot do alert.
You cannot do something,
sorry, not alter.
I mean alert.
You cannot do something like
document getelementbyid.
Because that doesn't make sense here.
Okay, so Node js has rewritten all
these bindings which are required.
For example, okay, understand this.
In browser you have this
something known as set timeout.
Yes or no, you have the set timeout.
Do you know that this set
timeout is a part of web API?
So JavaScript natively
doesn't support this.
Any clocks, timers or
something like that.
That's a browser feature
that browser gives you.
But in Node js also
you can use set timeout.
It is valid in here also
you can use this thing.
Okay, so how are you able
to use this set timeout?
Because when the creator of Node
js return this Node js engine,
he has reimplemented these APIs.
So he has only implemented
those parts again which are required
in the CLI environment.
In the Node js environment also,
for example, you might
need set timeout, right?
You might need set interval,
but in any case I don't
need alert on my backend.
Okay, so these particular
things are not present.
So these things are,
are not present here.
Okay, so even though it is
JavaScript, but yeah, the
JavaScript that you use on
browser is not guaranteed to run
here, and the JavaScript code
that can be run in the Node js is
not guaranteed to run here.
Depends code.
JavaScript will always run,
but features injected by the browser
API or the Node js API will
not work in a cross platform.
Okay, so there are subtle differences
that you have to keep in mind.